docs: update multiple-ns guide for v1alpha2 (#807)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: site-src/v1alpha2/guides/multiple-ns.md

# Cross-Namespace routing

The Gateway API has core support for cross Namespace routing. This is useful
when more than one user or team is sharing the underlying networking
infrastructure, yet control and configuration must be segmented to minimize
access and fault domains.

> Gateways and Routes can be deployed into different Namespaces and attached to
> each other across Namespace boundaries. This allows differing user access and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gateways and Routes can be deployed into different Namespaces and Routes 
attached to Gateways across Namespace boundaries. This allows differing user access and
```

I go into this further down the review, but I think that the way we need to discuss this is that Routes want to be/request to be attached, and Gateways allow the attachment.

their routes to the `Gateway`. The namespaces themselves must be decorated with
the corresponding labels:

```yaml
{% include 'v1alpha2/cross-namespace-routing/0-namespaces.yaml' %}
```

## Route Attachment Examples

The store team deploys their route for the `store` Service in the `store-ns`
Namespace:

```yaml
{% include 'v1alpha2/cross-namespace-routing/store-route.yaml' %}
```

This Route has straightforward routing logic as it just matches for
`/store` traffic which it sends to the `store` Service.

The site team now deploys Routes for their applications. They deploy two
HTTPRoutes into the `site-ns` Namespace:

- The `home` HTTPRoute acts as a default routing rule, matching for all traffic
to `foo.example.com/*` not matched by an existing routing rule and sending it to
the `home` Service.
- The `login` HTTPRoute  routes traffic for `foo.example.com/login` to
`service/login-v1` and `service/login-v2`. It uses weights to granularly
control traffic distribution between them.

Both of these Routes use the same Gateway attachment configuration which
specifies `gateway/shared-gateway` in the `infra-ns` Namespace as the only

> Gateway that these Routes can attach with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gateway that these Routes want to attach to.
```
The language that makes the most sense for me for Route attachment is that the Route "is requesting to attach to", or "wants to attach to" the Gateway. I know, it's a seemingly trivial thing to call out, but if we can use this consistently, we'll be able to shape how people think of this new process, and we only have one chance for a first impression.

configuration across their apps as much as possible to minimize access and failure domains.
They use separate HTTPRoutes attached to the same Gateway to isolate routing configurations,
such as canary rollouts, and still share the same but share the same IP address,
 port, DNS domain, and TLS certificate.
- The store team has a single Service called _store_ that they have deployed
in the `store-ns` Namespace which also needs to be exposed behind the same IP
 address and domain.
- The Foobar Corporation operates behind the `foo.example.com` domain for all
 apps. This is controlled by a central infrastructure team, operating in the
  `infra-ns` Namespace.
- Lastly, the security team controls the certificate for `foo.example.com`.
By managing this certificate through the single shared Gateway they are able
to centrally control security without directly involving application teams.

The logical relationship between the Gateway API resources looks like this:

![Cross-Namespace routing](../images/cross-namespace-routing.svg)

## Cross-namespace Route Attachment

[Route attachment][attaching] is an important concept that dictates how Routes

> and Gateways select each other to apply routing configuration to a Gateway. It

Reviewer 2: I think it's better to remove the idea of selecting each other since that's not really what happens now.
```suggestion
are attached to Gateways. It
```

> is especially relevant when there are multiple Gateways and multiple Namespaces
> in a cluster. Gateway and Route attachment is bidirectional - attachment can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is especially relevant when there are Routes in multiple namespaces that need to
attached to a shared Gateway. Gateway and Route attachment is bidirectional - attachment can
```

only succeed if the Gateway owner and Route owner owner both agree to the
relationship. This bi-directional relationship exists for two reasons:

- Route owners don't want to overexpose their applications and don't want
their apps to be accessible through paths they are not aware of.
- Gateway owners don't want apps using certain Gateways they should not be
using. An internal application shouldn't be exposed through a public Gateway
for example.

As a result, Gateways and Routes support independent _Attachment Constraints_.

> Attachment constraints are selectors or references on a given resource which 
> determine the resources that may attach to it. Gateway and Route attachment 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Attachment constraints are fields on Gateway Listeners that restrict which 
Routes can be attached. Gateway and Route attachment 
```

constraints create a handshake between the infra owners and the

>  application owners that enables them to be independent actors. Routes
> can only attach to specified Gateways and Gateways can constrain the Namespaces
> and type of Routes which are able to attach to it. Clusters which use attachment
> constraints to govern Route and Gateway attachment require less central administration

Reviewer 2: I found this section a bit confusing, but I'm not sure my suggestion here is better, feel free to ignore.
```suggestion
application owners that enables them to be independent actors. App owners directly reference 
the Gateway(s) they want their Routes to be attached to. Infra owners can constrain the
namespaces and types of Routes that can be attached to their Gateway(s). Clusters which use
these attachment constraints to govern Route and Gateway attachment require less central 
administration
```

manage TLS on behalf of app owners. The `foo-example-com` certificate will
terminate all traffic going to all its attached Routes, without any TLS configuration
on the HTTPRoutes themselves.

This Gateway uses attachment constraints to specify the Namespaces from which
HTTPRoutes can attach. This allows the infrastructure team to constrain who
or which apps can use this Gateway by allowlisting the set of Namespaces.

```yaml
...
  listeners:
  - routes:
      namespaces:
        selector:
          matchLabels:
          	shared-gateway-access: "true"
...
```

_Only_ Namespaces which are labelled `shared-gateway-access: "true"` will be able to attach
their Routes to `shared-gateway`. In the following set of Namespaces,
if an HTTPRoute existed in the `no-external-access` Namespace with a `parentRef` 
for `infra-ns/shared-gateway`, it would be ignored by the Gateway because the 
attachment constraint (Namespace label) was not met.

```yaml
{% include 'v1alpha2/cross-namespace-routing/0-namespaces.yaml' %}
```

Note that attachment constraints on the Gateway are not required, but they are 
 a best-practice if operating a cluster with many different teams

> and Namespaces. In environments where all apps in a cluster have permission to

Reviewer 2: A small nit that applies a few places in this file - there are some inconsistent line lengths and some extra leading spaces that would be nice to remove.

and all Routes can freely use the Gateway.

## Route Attachment 

The store team deploys their route for the `store` Service in the `store-ns`
Namespace:

```yaml
{% include 'v1alpha2/cross-namespace-routing/store-route.yaml' %}
```

This Route has straightforward routing logic as it just matches for
`/store` traffic which it sends to the `store` Service.

The site team now deploys Routes for their applications. They deploy two
HTTPRoutes into the `site-ns` Namespace:

- The `home` HTTPRoute acts as a default routing rule, matching for all traffic
to `foo.example.com/*` not matched by an existing routing rule and sending it to
the `home` Service.
- The `login` HTTPRoute  routes traffic for `foo.example.com/login` to
`service/login-v1` and `service/login-v2`. It uses weights to granularly
control traffic distribution between them.

Both of these Routes use the same Gateway attachment configuration which
specifies `gateway/shared-gateway` in the `infra-ns` Namespace as the only
Gateway that these Routes want to attach to.

```yaml
{% include 'v1alpha2/cross-namespace-routing/site-route.yaml' %}
```

After these three Routes are deployed, they will all be attached to the

> `shared-gateway` Gateway. The Gateway merges its bound attached into a single flat

Reviewer 2: Maybe this was the intent?
```suggestion
`shared-gateway` Gateway. The Gateway merges its attached Routes into a single flat
```

is especially relevant when there are multiple Gateways and multiple Namespaces
in a cluster. Gateway and Route attachment is bidirectional - attachment can
only succeed if the Gateway owner and Route owner owner both agree to the
relationship. This bi-directional relationship exists for two reasons:

- Route owners don't want to overexpose their applications and don't want
their apps to be accessible through paths they are not aware of.
- Gateway owners don't want apps using certain Gateways they should not be
using. An internal application shouldn't be exposed through a public Gateway
for example.

As a result, Gateways and Routes have independent control to determine which
resources they permit attaching to. It is a handshake between the infra owners
and the application owners that allows them to be independent actors. Routes
can only attach to specified gateways and Gateways provide a similar level of
selection control over which Routes they will send traffic to by trusting
specific namespaces in which those Routes live and operate. This allows a
cluster to be more self-governed, which requires less central administration

> to ensure that Routes are not over-exposed.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be updated more significantly. It all seems a bit too close to the v1alpha1 docs with the mentions of selection. In the new model, Routes directly reference Gateways they want to attach to, and Gateways describe where they trust Routes to attach from. These docs got lost in the recent restructuring, but might be a helpful reference point for rewriting this: https://deploy-preview-762--kubernetes-sigs-gateway-api.netlify.app/v1alpha2/concepts/api-overview/#how-it-works.

Author: 890861739ef42a42882a1241b3ae005cd833c301 was an attempt to significantly reword this area of the guide based on feedback, let me know your thoughts and if you feel there's more that needs to be done here.

Reviewer: I think what you have is looking pretty good, but I'd probably change this to reference that Gateways *allow* attachment, and Routes *request* attachment.

So, this section should be something like (sorry Github won't let me suggest here for some reason):
```
As a result, Gateways and Routes have independent control to determine which
resources will succeed in attaching. It is a handshake between the infra owners
and the application owners that allows them to be independent actors. Routes
can only attach to specified gateways and Gateways provide a similar level of
selection control over which Routes they allow to attach to by trusting
specific namespaces in which those Routes live and operate. This allows a
cluster to be more self-governed, which requires less central administration
to ensure that Routes are not over-exposed.
```

I also think we need to be really careful with "forward traffic to" because that implies the existence of an extra routing hop, which won't be the case with most implementations.

I think that for the attachment process, we need to make sure we're talking purely in terms of the Kubernetes objects and how they interact.

Author: I made the changes you requested in e5488f640e715adefe133c65a16f89e4d14a5cbd and verified that the word "forwarding" is being used in the technical sense and is not misrepresented elsewhere in the doc. Let me know if there's anything further you want to see changed.

can only bind to specified gateways and Gateways provide a similar level of
selection control over which Routes they will send traffic to by trusting
specific namespaces in which those Routes live and operate. This allows a
cluster to be more self-governed, which requires less central administration
to ensure that Routes are not over-exposed.

## Resource Deployment

The infrastructure team deploys the `shared-gateway` Gateway into the `infra-ns`
Namespace.

```yaml
{% include 'v1alpha2/cross-namespace-routing/gateway.yaml' %}
```

A few notes about this Gateway:

- It is matching for the `foo.example.com` domain. This is configured on the
Gateway so that each HTTPRoute does not also have to configure hostname matching,
since they are all using the same domain. This also allows these HTTPRoute
manifests to be reused across production and dev environments where the dev
environment might be hosted at `foo.dev.corp.example.com`.
- The Gateway is configured for HTTPS and references the `foo-example-com` Secret.
This allows the certificate to be managed centrally for all applications which
are using this Gateway.

> - It allows any Route in the cluster to use this Gateway because `namespaces.from = All`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Any HTTPRoute in this cluster can attach to this Gateway listener because `namespaces.from = All` is configured.
```

Author: this text was significantly changed in 890861739ef42a42882a1241b3ae005cd833c301

This is a permissive method of Route selection since the Routes are given
full control to select this Gateway. There are more restrictive forms of Route

> selection that allow selection on a per-Namespace basis, detailed

Reviewer 2: I think we should remove all references to Route selection, maybe remove these lines?

Author: done in 890861739ef42a42882a1241b3ae005cd833c301

in [Route binding](/concepts/api-overview/#route-binding). The following block
specifies how this Gateway allows HTTPRoutes from all Namespaces in the
cluster to bind to it:

```yaml
    routes:
      namespaces:
        from: "All"
      kinds:
      - HTTPRoute
```

Meanwhile, the store team deploys their route for the `store` Service in the
`store-ns` Namespace:

```yaml
{% include 'v1alpha2/cross-namespace-routing/store-route.yaml' %}
```

This Route has straightforward routing logic as it just matches for

> `/store` traffic which it sends to the `store` Service.

Reviewer 2: Nit: Line length feels inconsistent throughout this doc - please wrap at 80 chars.

Author: done in 890861739ef42a42882a1241b3ae005cd833c301

The site team now deploys Routes for their applications. They deploy two
HTTPRoutes into the `site-ns` Namespace:

- The `home` HTTPRoute acts as a default routing rule, matching for all traffic
to `foo.example.com/*` not matched by an existing routing rule and sending it to
the `home` Service.

> - The `login` HTTPRoute  routes traffic for `foo.example.com/login` to
> `service/login-v1` and `service/login-v2`. It uses weights to granularly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `login` HTTPRoute  splits traffic to `foo.example.com/login` between
`service/login-v1` and `service/login-v2`. It uses weights to granularly
```

Author: this text was significantly changed in 8908617

> 

Reviewer 3: > Route-owners can specify that they will bind with all Gateways in the cluster,
or only Gateways from a specific Namespace, with a specific label selector, or
an individual Gateway.

This is outdated. Route owners now target specific gateways only.

> Similarly, Gateways provide the same level of control.

Please expand on this. Gateways trust namespaces where Routes (which bind to it) can live.

Author: 49cd40e46f2554bffc359c02b8565d8edfa0f109 was created to clean up the wording, and expand the wording as requested.

lmkwyt

Author: 49cd40e46f2554bffc359c02b8565d8edfa0f109 was created to clean up the wording, and expand the wording as requested.

Meanwhile, the store team deploys their route for the `store` Service in the 
Meanwhile, the store team deploys their route for the `store` Service in the
`store-ns` Namespace:

```yaml
{% include 'v1alpha1/cross-namespace-routing/store-route.yaml' %}
```

This Route has straightforward routing logic as it just matches for 
`/store` traffic which it sends to the `store` Service. The following snippet 
of the [`gateways` field](/v1alpha2/references/spec/#networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1.RouteGateways) 
controls which Gateways this Route can bind to:

```yaml
  gateways:
    allow: FromList
    gatewayRefs:
    - name: shared-gateway
      namespace: infra
{% include 'v1alpha2/cross-namespace-routing/store-route.yaml' %}
```

`gateways.allow` can be configured for Gateways in the same Namespace as the
Route (the default), all Gateways, or a list of specific Gateways. In this
example the store and site teams decide to reference a specific Gateway. This is
the least permissive choice which ensures that other Gateways in the cluster
(perhaps created in the future at some point) will not bind with these Routes.
If cluster administrators have full control over how Gateways are deployed in a

> cluster then a more permissive binding option could be configured on Routes. The

Reviewer 3: @robscott Are we using "Route Binding" or "Route attachment" from a terminology perspective? If latter, please change within the doc for consistency.

Reviewer 2: I think we've historically used the terms interchangeably, but especially with the newer v1alpha2 approach, I personally prefer "attachment"

Author: It looks like we're getting a lot of this mixed around, for instance the `site-src/v1alpha2/concepts/api-overview.md` recently changed the nomenclature of the section previously known as `Route Binding` to `Attaching Routes to Gateways` but then inside of that section continues to use the word binding (interchangeably, as rob suggested).

For the purposes of updating this specific guide, I've removed the binding language and just use "attachment" for consistency with the `Attaching Routes to Gateways` section in the concepts docs:

48b31b72f7606564866d0b0af156545469c2f566

Let me know what you think.

Reviewer 4: this guide now uses "route attachment"
